release.txt


                           GSFLOW Release Notes


     This file describes changes introduced into GSFLOW with each
official release; these changes may substantially affect users.


NOTE: Any use of trade, product or firm names is for descriptive
purposes only and does not imply endorsement by the U.S. Government.



o Version 1.1.5 01/15/2012:

This version of GSFLOW is based on MODFLOW-2005 version 1.8, MODFLOW-NWT
version 1.0.3 and PRMS version 3.4179. Several enhancements and bug fixes
have been done for this release. Important enhancements include addition of
the Newton Formulation for MODFLOW and the Map Results and Climate by HRU
Distribution Modules for PRMS. All of the updates are described in the files
"GSFLOW_v1.1.5_Updates.pdf," "Map_results.pdf," "Climate_hru.pdf,"
"Appendix1_Tables_v1.1.5.pdf," and "SFR2_for_GSFLOW_v1.1.5.pdf."


o Version 1.1.4 06/01/2011:

This version of GSFLOW is based on MODFLOW-2005 version 1.8 and PRMS version
2.3116. Users are encouraged to review the release materials for MODFLOW-2005 
for a full description of updates made for version 1.8. 

A number of changes and bug fixes were made for this release. The modifications
are grouped by PRMS modules and MODFLOW Packages.

PRMS modules:

Potential Solar Radiation Module (soltab_hru_prms.f): The area-weighted mean basin
latitude was computed incorrectly for models having inactive cells. This bug
affected the computation of potential solar radiation on a horizontal plane for
the basin latitude and snow computations involving solar radiation. 

Cascading-Flow Module (cascade_prms.f): The default values for hru_down_id and
gw_down_id were changed from 1 to 0. If an HRU is determined to be a swale, an 
error message is issued and the simulation stops if the value of hru_type is not
specifed with the value 3.
 
Ground-Water Reservoir Module (gwflow_casc_prms.f): Units for variables gw_in_ssr,
gw_in_soil, gwres_in were computed in units of inches. They are now computed in
units of acre-inches as documented.
 
Surface-Runoff and Infiltration Modules (srunoff_smidx_casc.f and 
srunoff_carea_casc.f): Evaporation from impervious areas of HRUs is now computed
at the potential evapotranspiration rate rather than at the rate of unsatisified 
potential evapotranspiration. Also, a check was added to srunoff_carea_casc.f to
be sure the computed contributing area used to compute surface runoff does not 
exceed 1.0. This check is made for each HRU for each timestep.

Lapse-Station Temperature-Distribution Module (temp_laps_prms.f): If the altitude
of the temperature-measurement stations used to compute lapse rates are equal, the 
code sets the difference to 1.0 in units based on the value of elev_units. This 
was done to avoid divide by zero.
  
Precipitation-Distribution Modules (precip_prms.f, precip_laps_prms.f, 
precip_dist2_prms, xyz_dist.f): If the computed maximum and minimum air temperatures
are equal, the difference is set to 0.01 degrees Fahrenheit. Also, for module
precip_laps_prms.f, if the altitude of precipation measurement stations used to
compute lapse rates are equal, the code sets the difference to 1.0 in units based 
on the value of elev_units. This was done to avoid divide by zero.

MODFLOW Packages:

Lake package (gwf2lak7.f): Corrected two bugs. The first caused the package to
incorrectly set the uppermost active cell beneath a lake cell to NLAY. The second
occurred in the calculation of outflow to a stream for specified outflow
diversions; the lake stage was not being set correctly.

Unsaturated-Flow Package (gwf2uzf1.f and gwfuzfmodule.f): Added deallocate
statements for the variables CHECKTIME, MORE and LAYNUM. The default value for the
variable SURFDEP was changed from 1.0 to 1.0x10-6.

Streamflow-Routing Package (gwf2sfr7.f and gwfsfrmodule.f): Modifications were made
to correct the effects of lakes inundating stream cells. Seepage in inundated stream
cells was not being set to zero in the budget routine. 


o Version 1.1.3 03/01/2011:

This version of GSFLOW is based on MODFLOW-2005 version 1.8. Users are encouraged
to review the release materials for MODFLOW-2005 for a full description of updates
made for version 1.8. This version of GSFLOW includes (1) the new Grid Report
Module, (2) enhanced input options for the PRMS Parameter File, (3) a new option
for the SFR2 Package to specify streamflows to simulated stream segments in 
tabular files that are external to the SFR2 main input file, and (4) several
other smaller modifications and enhancements. All of the updates are described
in the file 'GSFLOW_v1.1.3_Updates.pdf' provided in the .\doc\GSFLOW subdirectory.
Revised input instructions for the SFR2 Package (for use with GSFLOW) are provided
in file 'SFR2_for_GSFLOW_v1.1.3.pdf' in the same directory. The Appendix 1 tables
('Appendix1_Tables_v1.1.3.pdf') also have been updated for the new Grid Report
Module. Users are encouraged to review the updated documents.

o Version 1.1.2 07/23/2010:

This version of GSFLOW is based on MODFLOW-2005 version 1.8. Users are encouraged
to review the release materials for MODFLOW-2005 for a full description of updates
made for version 1.8.

Documentation issues:
1. A new version of PRMSmanual.pdf was added to the 'doc' subdirectory to replace
the previous, corrupted version.
2. An updated version of Appendix1_Tables_v1.1.pdf has been added to the 
'doc\GSFLOW' subdirectory with the following changes:
a. Table A1-19 (Soil-Zone Module): parameters ssr2gw_exp, ssr2gw_rate, and 
ssstor_init can only have the dimension nssr. Thus, delete "or nhrucell" from the 
dimension column. Also, parameter ssrmax_coef is no longer used and should be 
removed from Parameter Files. (Table A1-18 in the GSFLOW manual, USGS TM6-D1 
should also be updated.)
b. Table A1-4: Dimensions one, nmonths, and ndays no longer need to be specified in 
a GSFLOW Parameter File. (Table A1-4 in USGS TM6-D1 should also be updated.)

Note on dimension parameters nhru, nssr, and ngw:
The three dimension parameters nhru, nssr, and ngw, which are specified in the
dimensions section of the PRMS Parameter File, must all be equal when running
GSFLOW in either PRMS-only or GSFLOW modes. If the three parameters are not
equal, a message will be written to the user's screen and the three parameters
will be set equal to one another by the code.

Unsaturated-Zone Flow Package (gwf2uzf1.f):
1. An enhancement was done to increase the internal check made by UZF of the ratio 
of ROOTDEPTH to the thickness of the cell from 0.90 to 0.99.
2. Fixed memory out-of-bounds bug for array BOTM when IUZFBND was specified as 
less than zero. This problem was fixed by taking the absolute value of IUZFBND 
when used to access arrays.

Cascade Module (cascade_prms.f):
Added check to ignore any cascade links that have invalid values specified for 
parameters hru_up_id or gw_up_id, such as less than 1 or greater than dimension 
nhru.

Subbasin Computation Module (subbasin_prms.f):
If the code is executed in GSFLOW mode, subbasin streamflow variables will not be 
calculated.

Precipitation- and Temperature-Distribution Modules
(precip_dist2_prms.f and temp_dist2_prms.f):
Added input-data check to be sure that at least one climate station has a valid 
value for both precipitation and air temperature for each time step (as specified 
in the Data File). If all values of precipitation and air temperature are invalid
for a time step, such as might occur if all values are specified as missing, a
message is printed to the user's screen and the simulation is terminated.

Soil-Zone Module (soilzone_prms.f):
1. Added a variable that saves the current version-date of the module. This 
variable is written to the gsflow.log file.
2. Enhanced debug option: If print_debug, which is specified in the GSFLOW control 
File, is set to 7, messages related to inconsistencies in the soil-zone input 
parameters are written to the new file soilzone_prms.dbg in the user's current 
directory. Previously, these warning messages were written to the user's screen.
3. Added check to determine if swale HRUs are generating water storage (ponding on 
the surface) in excess of three times the specified value of parameter 
sat_threshold. If this is the case, a message is written to the soilzone_prms.dbg 
file if print_debug has been specified as 7. It is recommended that users set 
print_debug to 7 for initial GSFLOW simulations, and that the soilzone_dbg file 
be examined to identify any parameter inconsistencies or potential problems with
swale discretization prior to calibrating a model.

GSFLOW Computation-Control Module (gsflow_prms.f):
Added a variable that saves the current version date of the module. This variable 
is written to the gsflow.log file.

GSFLOW Conversion Factors Module (gsflow_setconv.f):
Bug fix: Fixed possible use of incorrect index for arrays Gwc_row and Gwc_col.

GSFLOW Integration Module (gsflow_prms2mf.f):
1. Added input-data check to be sure that if an HRU is specified as a lake, the 
associated MODFLOW lake id is specified other than 0 for parameter lake_hru_id. 
If an error is detected, an error message is printed to the user's screen and model 
execution is terminated.
2. Corrected the computation of the number of soilzone computations per time step, 
which is printed in tabular form to the gsflow.log file.
3. Fixed a bug that caused the possible override of computed flows in transient 
GSFLOW simulations with flows specified in MODFLOW input files. Any specified flows 
in the MODFLOW input files are used in steady-state mode and ignored in transient 
mode of a GSFLOW simulation.

GSFLOW Summary Module (gsflow_sum.f):
Fixed the values reported for total basin precipitation and evaporation to include 
lake precipitation and evaporation.


o Version 1.1.1 02/12/2010:

This version of GSFLOW is based on MODFLOW-2005 version 1.8, which
includes the Multi-Node Well version 2 Package. Additional minor
changes also were made to version 1.8 that are explained in the 
MODFLOW-2005 release documents.

Added module transp_tindex_prms: This module is used to determine the 
active period of plant transpiration. The module is based on code 
previously located in the potet_jh_prms, potet_hamon_hru_prms, and 
potet_pan_prms modules. Therefore, those modules were changed as well.

Module snowcomp_prms: 
1. A new output variable has been added:
 basin_snowdepth, which is the basin area-weighted average snow depth.

Module soilzone_prms: 
1. Three new ouput variables have been added:
 gw_recharge_day, which is the sum of soil_to_gw and ssr_to_gw for each
   HRU for each daily time step
 gw_recharge_tot, which is the sum of soil_to_gw and ssr_to_gw for each
   HRU for the total simulation time period
 basin_gw_recharge, which is the basin area-weighted sum of soil_to_gw
   and ssr_to_gw

2. Parameter ssrmax_coef, which is the maximum amount of gravity drainage 
 to a PRMS groundwater reservoir or MODFLOW finite-difference cell, was
 set to a value of 1.0, the default value. Previously, the variable could
 range to a maximum value of 20.0, which was incorrect.

3. Added consistency checks to be sure the following parameters are not
 specified to a value less than zero: soil_moist_max, soil_moist_init,
 soil_rechr_max, soil_rechr_init, ssstor_init, and sat_threshold.

Module gsflow_prms2mf: 
1. Added parameter mnsziter, which is the minimum number of computations per
time step that are computed by the Soil Zone Module. Computations within the
Soil Zone Module include Dunnian runoff, interflow, changes in storage within
the soil-zone reservoirs, components of evapotranspiration, and potential
gravity drainage. The sequence of these computations is described in Table 9
of the GSFLOW documentation report (USGS Techniques and Methods 6-D1, p. 51).
The following provides a more detailed explanation than is found in the GSFLOW
manual of the conditions under which a GSFLOW time step concludes. 

GSFLOW is based on an iterative-solution method in which convergence for each
time step is ultimately dependent on whether or not changes in groundwater heads
and flow rates meet closure criteria specified in the MODFLOW solver packages.
If the MODFLOW convergence criteria are met, then GSFLOW continues to the next
time step; if the convergence criteria are not met but the maximum number of
MODFLOW iterations per time step is exceeded (as specified using variable MXITER 
or ITMX in the MODFLOW solver packages), then GSFLOW will print a warning message 
and continue to the next time step. Note that this differs from MODFLOW, in which 
MODFLOW stops if MXITER or ITMX are exceeded.

Convergence of groundwater heads and flow rates is dependent in part on the 
amount of gravity drainage that drains from the soil zone to the underlying 
unsaturated and saturated zones. The amount of gravity drainage is dependent 
on the potential gravity drainage computed by the Soil Zone Module and the 
vertical hydraulic conductivity and heads within the MODFLOW finite-difference 
cells. In many cases, heads and groundwater flow rates may converge faster if 
the amount of gravity drainage from the soil zone is no longer changing, which 
means that the MODFLOW computations will no longer be dependent on feedback 
from the Soil Zone Module. 

Three GSFLOW input parameters are provided to allow the user to stop the 
soil-zone computations prior to convergence of the groundwater heads and flow 
rates. These parameters are (1) szconverge, which is the maximum allowed change 
in gravity drainage from the soil zone for all HRUs between iterations required 
before the soil-zone computations cease; (2) mnsziter, which is defined above; 
and (3) mxsziter, which is the maximum number of computations per time step that 
are computed by the Soil Zone Module. Parameters szconverge and mxsziter have 
been available since the initial release of GSFLOW (see Table A1-25 in USGS 
Techniques and Methods 6-D1). Computations within the soil zone cease under three 
conditions listed in order of precedence: (1) the MODFLOW closure criteria are 
met or MXITER or ITMX is reached; (2) the maximum number of soil-zone computations 
is reached, as specified by parameter mxsziter; or (3) the maximum change in 
gravity drainage from the soil zone for all HRUs between iterations is less than 
the value specified for parameter szconverge. When conditions 2 or 3 are met, all 
computations done by the Soil Zone Module are held constant for the remainder of 
the current time step until MODFLOW-related convergence criteria are met 
(or MXITER or ITMX is exceeded). In addition, the amount of interflow and 
surface runoff to streams and lakes are held constant when soil-zone 
computations cease within a time step.

Previous versions of GSFLOW set the minimum number of soil-zone computations 
to 4, which is now the default value for mnsziter; mnsziter must be specified 
to be greater than 2. Specifying too small a value for mxsziter for complex 
GSFLOW models can stop soil-zone computations within a time step before the 
MODFLOW solution reaches a stable value; this may cause groundwater discharge 
from some finite-difference cells in subsequent iterations to be significantly 
different than that computed at the iteration in which the soil-zone computations 
ceased. In general, more complex models will require higher values of mnsziter 
and mxsziter than less complex models. Recent experience with GSFLOW indicates 
that (1) mnsziter and mxsziter should be set to values that equal the approximate 
average number and the maximum number of MODFLOW iterations that are expected for 
any time step, respectively; and (2) that for some simulations, it may be 
advantageous to not limit the number of soil-zone computations by setting both 
mnsziter and mxsziter equal to MXITER or ITMX to allow for full feedback between 
PRMS and MODFLOW for each time step. The GSFLOW user may need to experiment with 
the values specified for szconverge, mnsziter, and mxsziter to be sure that the 
GSFLOW calculations have converged to stable values.

For the convenience of the user, the number of MODFLOW iterations and soil-zone 
computations are printed to the screen for the first day of each month and for 
each time step in the gsflow.log file. Also, if the number of iterations for a 
time step exceeds 75, the date and time of this time step is printed to the screen. 
At the end of a simulation, a summary table is printed to the screen and gsflow.log 
file giving the total and average number of MODFLOW iterations and soil-zone 
computations, as well as the total time the simulation took.


2. Bug fix: corrected do loop index of arrays used to check whether or not
 soilzone states are oscillating.

Module gsflow_prms: 
1. Module subbasin_prms can now be called in both GSFLOW and PRMS-only modes.
 Previously, it could be called in PRMS-only mode. However, the user 
 should be aware that some output variables written by the module are not
 relevant to a GSFLOW simulation, specifically those related to the PRMS
 groundwater module: sub_inq, sub_cfs, sub_cms, sub_gwflow, and
 subinc_gwflow. The subbasin_prms module is useful in GSFLOW mode for 
 computation of several subbasin states and fluxes, such as sub_interflow, 
 sub_precip, sub_pkweqv, subinc_interflow, sbinc_sroff, subinc_precip,
 subinc_snowmelt, subinc_pkweqv, subinc_actet, sub_actet, sub_sroff,
 sub_snowmelt, and subinc_snowcov.

o Version 1.1.00 11/18/2009:


This version of GSFLOW is based on MODFLOW-2005 version 1.7. Added 
ability to specify inactive and swale hydrologic response unit types
and the ability to calculate streamflow at internal basin nodes (the
latter for PRMS-only simulations). Several additional bug fixes and minor
enhancements were made for this release. All of the changes are described
in the file 'GSFLOW_v1.1_Updates.pdf' located in the \doc\GSFLOW directory.
Updated input formats for the PRMS and GSFLOW modules, including several
new input parameters, are provided in the file 'Appendix1_Tables_v1.1.pdf,'
which is also included in the \doc\GSFLOW directory. Also made changes to 
the Sagehen sample problem by simplifying the MODFLOW Name File and making 
the MODFLOW transient stress period consistent with the total number of 
time steps simulated by GSFLOW; these changes did not affect the results 
of the sample problem.


o Version 1.0.00 03/05/2008:


This version is the initial release.



